doc(pkg): Explain package management (#10950)
ocaml/dune: doc/explanation/package-management.md

it is aimed at people who want to understand how the feature works, not how it
is used.

For a tour on how to apply package management to a project refer to the
{doc}`/tutorials/dune-package-management/index` tutorial.

## Motivation

A core part of modern programming is using other existing code to save time.
The history of the OCaml package ecosystem is quite long with a lot of projects
building upon each other over many years. A significant step forward was the
creation of an OCaml Package Manager, OPAM, along with the establishment of a
public package repository which made it a lot more feasible to share code
between people and projects.

Over time best practices have evolved, and while OPAM has incorporated some
changes, due to its existing user base and constraints it couldn't adopt all
the modern workflows.

Dune package management attempts to take the parts of the OPAM ecosystem that
have stood the test of time and couple them with a modern workflow. Some of the
improvements include:

* Automatic package repository updates
* Easily reproducible dependencies
* All package dependencies declared in a single file that is kept in-sync

> * Per-project dependencies

Reviewer: I don't see what's new in that list from what opam can already do (apart from automatic package repository updates, which can be seen as quite bad from a reproducibility point of view if you don't have a lockfile). 

Instead of comparing opam vs. dune pkg, I would stress the design principle. A random list of stuff:
- making the OCaml environment setup trivial;
- promoting a lockfile-first approach to address reproducibility use cases;
- unifying the configuration files (and removing hidden global states managed by a CLI tool);
- improving cross-packages and vendoring workflows;
and much more.

Reviewer 2: Here's a few principles that I've had in mind when designing this feature:

1. No global state visible to the user
2. All package configuration must be done via config file updates (dune-project or dune-workspace). No stateful commands such as `opam pin`.
3. "Automatic` package repository updates" also applies to pins. For example, we re-fetch branches & tags.
4. Package builds can only access packages which are listed as dependencies.
5. Users do not need to learn yet another file format to configure their workspace. Everything should be doable via workspaces.
6. Build plans are independently versioned so that they can be interpreted in the same way between different versions of dune

Author: I've updated the section to describe the features of the package management without explicit comparison with OPAM.

packages to install from the `depends` stanza in the `dune-project` file. This
allows projects to completely omit generation of `.opam` files, as long as they
use Dune for package management. Thus all dependencies are only declared in one
file.

For compatibility with a larger amount of existing projects Dune will also
collect dependencies from `.opam` files in the project. So while recommended,
there is no obligation to switch to declaring dependencies in the
`dune-project`. Likewise the generation of `.opam` files will still work.

## Locking

To go from a set of dependency constraints for a project to a set of installed
packages and versions there needs to be a step to determine the right packages
and their versions to be installed.

In `opam` this process happens as part of `opam install`, thus linking finding
a solution that satifies the given constrains and installation into one step.
Dune on the other hand moves finding a solution and installing into separate
steps. First a solution is found and then packages are installed separately.
The idea of finding a solution and recording it for later is popular in many

> package managers and is usually called locking.

Reviewer 3: I think it can be nice to give some examples here

Author: I've added NPM, any other package managers worth mentioning? Cargo?

Reviewer 3: I think NPM is a good one :+1:

:::{note}
`opam` also supports creating lock-files. However these are not as central to
the opam workflow as they are in the case of package management in Dune, which
always requires a set of locked packages.
:::

A package lock is in the most general sense just a set of specific packages and
their versions to be installed.

A Dune lockfile extends this to a directory with files that describe the
dependencies. It includes the name of the package and the version. Unlike many
other package managers, the files include a lot of other information as well,
such as the location of the source archives to download (since there is no
central location for all archives), the build instructions (since each package
can use its own way of building) as well as additional metadata like the system
packages it depends upon.

> The files are stored in a directory as separate files, because that makes it

Reviewer 3: It could be interesting to mention the `dune.lock` dir name.

Author: I was a bit hesitant as `dune.lock` feels a bit like an implementation detail but I guess in case we change it we can change this document as well.

easier to manage them in source control (less potential conflicts). Storing
additional files like patches is also simpler this way.

### Package Repository Management

To find a valid solution that allows a project to be built it is necessary to
know what packages exist, what versions of these packages exist, what other
packages these depend on etc.

In OPAM this information is tracked in a central repository called
[OPAM-repository](https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository) which contains all
the metadata for published packages.

It is managed using Git and OPAM typically uses a snapshot of it to look up the
dependencies when trying to find a solution that satisfies the constraints.

Likewise, Dune uses the same repository, however instead of snapshots of the
files it uses the Git repository directly. In fact, Dune maintains a shared
internal cache containing all Git repositories that projects use. This has the
advantage that updates to the metadata are very fast since only the newest
revisions have to be retrieved. The downside is that for the creation of the
cache the entire repository has to be cloned first.

> Given a priorization of fast updates, whenever Dune needs to determine the

Reviewer: Does it mean `dune pkg lock` always needs network access?

Author: It needs network access unless the repos you use are pinned to a revision that's in the rev store.

Reviewer: Do you have a way to control this? Ie. what if I want to rebuild a package in a train (with all the dependencies already cached locally because I've built the project in the past)

Author: If you have built the project in the past, then you don't need to relock and it works offline (as fetch rules are cached out of the box since #10710), even if you remove `_build`.

If you want to relock without internet it requires a bit if configuration. You can define the opam-repos to use for locking to use an exact revision [like here](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials/dune-package-management/repos.html), in which case Dune will first check whether the revision is available in the revision cache, and only pull if the revision was not found yet.

available packages, it will update the repository first. Thus each locking
process by default will use the newest set of packages available.

However it is also possible to specify specific revisions of the repositories,
to get a reproducible solution. Due to using Git any previous revision of the
repository can be used, by specifying a commit hash.

Dune defines two repositories by default:

* `upstream` which refers to the default branch of `opam-repository`, which
  contains all the publically released packages.
* `overlay` which refers to
  [opam-overlay](https://github.com/ocaml-dune/opam-overlays), which defines
  packages patched to work with package management. The long-term goal is to
  have as few packages as possible in this repository as more and more packages
  work within Dune package management upstream. Check the
  [compatibility](#compatibility) section for details.

### Solving

After Dune has retrieved the constraints and the set of possible packages it is

> necessary to determine which packages & versions should be selected for the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
necessary to determine which packages and versions should be selected for the
```

package lock.

To do so, Dune uses
[opam-0install-solver](https://github.com/ocaml-opam/opam-0install-solver),
which is a variant of the 0install solver to find solutions for OPAM packages.

Contrary to `opam`, the Dune solver always starts from a blank slate. It
assumes nothing is installed and everything needs to be installed. This has the
advantage that solving is simpler and previous solver solutions don't interfere
with the current one. Thus given the same inputs it should always have the same
outputs; no state is held between the solver runs.

This can lead to more packages being installed (as OPAM won't by default
install new versions of packages if the existing versions satisfy the
constraints) but it avoids interference from already installed packages that
lead to potentially different solutions.

After solving is done, the solution gets written into the lock directory with
all the data that is necessary to build and install the packages. From this
point, the project contains all necessary information and does not need to

> access any package repositories.

Reviewer 3: It might be interesting to have a terminology specification somewhere. When I read the sentence, it seems wrong, as we will later install packages. The distinction between package repositories and the packages we installed should be somewhere in an index, IMO.

Author: I am unsure what you consider untrue about it? I've elaborated that section, also noting that it does not download sources, is it better now?

Reviewer 3: Sorry for the delay, as it was marked as outdated I didn't see it. The `package repositories` can be confusing: we won't access opam-repository for the metadata, but it will need to access the server where you host the package to fetch the tarball. It could be considered as a package repository too. Hence, my question about the terminology ^^

Author: Ok, I added the word "metadata" (and you can see there is also a note that sources are not being downloaded).

I personally don't consider the package sources a repository per-se as for a repository to me implies a sort of centralized collection of things (like a git repository is a collection of files that belong to a project or opam repository is a collection of opam files or the NPM registry is a repository because it contains the packages themselves), whereas the source files are just a loose collection of URLs. While it's true that a lot of tarballs are on Github, that seems more an emergent outcome than some deliberate effort in creating a repository of package tarballs.

Anyway, long story short, I'm marking this as resolved unless people disagree.

## Building

When building, Dune will read the information from the lock directory and set

> up build rules to use the packages. The rules include

Reviewer 3: Could be nice to point to Dune mental model here :smile:

* Fetch rules to download the sources as well as any additional sources like
  patches and unpack them
* Build rules to evaluate the build instructions from the build instructions
  stored in the lock directory
* Install rules to put the artifacts that were built into the appropriate,
  Dune-managed folders

Creating these processes as rules means that they will only be executed on
demand, thus if the project has already downloaded the sources, it does not
need to download them again. Likewise, if packages are installed, they stay
installed.

The results of the rules are stored in the `_build` directory of the project
and managed automatically by Dune. Thus when cleaning the build directory, the

> installed packages are cleaned as well and will be reinstalled at the next

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we talk about the fact that they are cached, so it will be much faster the second time?

Author: But they're not cached (by default) at the moment, so it would seem a bit weird to describe that as a feature.

Reviewer 3: My bad, I thought they were with the recent discussions on the cache :see_no_evil:

build.

When building the users project, the installed packages are added to the
necessary search paths, thus user code can use the dependencies without any
additional configuration.

> (compatibility)=

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Is it Sphinx syntax or a typo?

Author: It's MyST (the markdown plugin for reST/RTD) syntax, so I can refer to that section as `#compatibility` elsewhere. There's a whole stack of Markdown, MyST and RTD things overlapping so determining what syntax to use can be a bit surprising.

## Packaging for Dune Compatibility

Dune can build and install most packages as dependencies, even if they are not
built with Dune themselves. Dune will execute the build instructions from the
lock file, very similar to `opam`.

However, there are some important restrictions that packages must adhere to to
be able to work with Dune.

The most important one is that the packages must not use absolute paths to
refer to files. That means, they cannot read the path they are being built or
installed into and expect this path to be stable. Dune builds packages in a
sandbox location and after the build has finished it moves the files to the

> actual destination.

Reviewer: Maybe a good place to explain the difference between Dune and Opam sandboxing models?

Author: The main difference is that we build in a different path than the one we install to. As far as I know the fact that we don't wrap things in `bwrap`/`sandbox-exec` are not design decisions, just something we haven't implemented yet. It is good idea and shouldn't be too difficult, especially with `opam` having made sure that packages generally work in its sandbox.

Reviewer 4: I think its worth highlighting that we aren't bwrapping stuff – we can give a shoutout to Opam there as well.

Author: I don't really like to include things that can change easily within the scope of one PR as that will date the document and needs to be updated but I added a note on this.

> The reason for this is that one hand enables building without messing up the

Reviewer: one hand enables -> missing word?

current state and on the other hand it allows for caching artifacts across
projects.

To sidestep these restructions in many cases the solution is to use relative
paths, as Dune guarantees that packages installed into different sections are
installed in a way where their relative location stays the same.

> A minor difference is that Dune does not support packages installing themselves

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure to understand this paragraph, could you elaborate?

Author: Some (very few) opam packages install themselves in the compilers `stdlib` folder, where you don't need to declare them as dependency in `(libraries)` (so they work like `List` or `String` etc).

This doesn't work in Dune, as Dune does not allow packages to install themselves into other package's folders. It is a bit hacky and only works in OPAM because the compiler's stdlib folder has a known location; OPAM does not expose that location as a section for `install` files.

Do you have a suggestion how to describe this in an understandable way?

Reviewer 3: Out of curiosity, do you have a package name doing this? :smile: 

Otherwise, the explanation you gave me is pretty understandable. I was lacking the context that some packages are actually doing this! I think providing the context would make it more understandable. 
```
Some packages install themselves in the Stdlib directory
-> Allow by opam because of a known location 
-> Dune is per project so don't have a global location
-> [rest of you explanation]
```
:+1:

Author: Yes, we encountered this issue with the `num` package: https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository/pull/26178. I think the only packages that would do this are packages that have been spun out of the stdlib (thus were previously accessible without a `libraries` entry thus the `compat` packages preserve the behavior) but don't install a into a package directory. In the case of `num` we solved this by installing into both places and that seems to be a best-of-both-worlds situation.

However, this is a fairly rare case, as `num` was the only occurrence, so maybe not even worth mentioning.

# How Package Management Works

This document gives an explanation on how the new package management
feature introduced in Dune works under the hood. It requires a bit of
familiarity with how opam repositories work and how Dune builds packages. Thus
it is aimed at people who want to understand how the feature works, not how it

> is used.

Author: Good point, better to avoid a The New iPad (2012) situation.

Over time, best practices have evolved, and while opam has incorporated some
changes, it couldn't adopt all the modern workflows due to its existing user base and constraints. 

Dune Package Management attempts to take the parts of the opam ecosystem that
have stood the test of time and couple them with a modern workflow. Some of the
improvements include:

* Automatic package repository updates
* Easily reproducible dependencies
* All package dependencies declared in a single file that is kept in-sync
* Per-project dependencies

Dune plays well with the existing OCaml ecosystem and does not introduce a new
type of packages. Rather, it uses the same package repository and Dune packages stay
installable with opam.

## Package Management in a Project

This section describes what happens in a Dune project using the package
management feature.

## Dependency Selection

The first step is to determine which packages need to be installed.
Traditionally this has been defined in the `depends` field of a projects opam
file(s).

Since a while Dune has also supported {doc}`opam file generation
</howto/opam-file-generation>` by specifying the package dependencies in the

> `dune-project`. Outside of this feature, Dune had not used the `depends` stanza.

Reviewer 5: There's something off with the beginning of this sentence. Do you mean: "For a while, Dune has also supported..." or "Since Dune has supported...."

Author: Thanks for pointing it out. The "a while" was my attempt to weasel out of the fact that I don't know since when this existed. This pushed me to open #10984 so I can write "1.10" here and it makes more sense.

The package management feature changes this, as Dune now determines the list of
packages to install from the `depends` stanza in the `dune-project` file. This
allows projects to completely omit generation of `.opam` files, as long as they
use Dune for package management. Thus all dependencies are only declared in one

> file.

Author: I've changed this section a bit. I think the core confusion comes from the fact that we have two types of dependencies:

 * OCaml packages (or OPAM packages?) which are now in `dune-project`
 * Libraries (or findlib libraries?) which are typically shipped in OCaml packages, which continue to be declared in `dune` files.

To me this is fairly clear since we're talking about an opam replacement (and opam has no notion of the findlib packages), but maybe it should go to some kind of glossary?

> file.

Reviewer 6: I admit that I have no clue why we have library names, ocamlfind names, and opam names. I have never seen cases where the ocamlfind and opam names are of any use, but that could be ignorance. On the other hand, I get confused semi regularly because I know the lib name I want to use but I have no idea how to figure what package it comes from.

The dune files contains things like `core_kernel.foo`, so I have the impression that the `core_kernel` bit is the opam bit. I certainly generate my dune-project from my dune files by dropping the parts of the name after the dots:

```sh
$ dune describe external-lib-deps | sexp select external_deps | sexp query 'each (index 0)' | cut -d . -f 1 | sort -u | grep -xv dynlink | xargs echo
```

> file.

Author: It's a bit of a complicated historical thing because these concepts separate but unrelated. ocamlfind names are names of libraries that are declared in META files (this is what Dune uses in `library` stanzas). These are used to tell the compiler in which directory to look at to find the compiled modules of a particular library, they basically extend the search patch with a few `-I` options. There was no means of distribution at first, then game GODI/WODI.

OPAM came along later and introduced OPAM packages as a way to distribute tarballs + their build instructions. However you can package anything in your tarball (multiple `ocamlfind` libraries in one OPAM package is totally valid) thus the names of packages are not linked to the names of libraries.

Dune adds a bit on top of that by forcing public libraries start with the name of the opam package that it is supposed to go in, but this is a Dune-specific convention and does not apply to all packages in OPAM.

Anyway, I think this is somewhat of a deep dive into something else that's not really related to package management.

For compatibility with a larger amount of existing projects, Dune will also
collect dependencies from `.opam` files in the project. So while recommended,
there is no obligation to switch to declaring dependencies in the

> `dune-project`. Likewise the generation of `.opam` files will still work.

Author: What do you mean?

> `dune-project`. Likewise the generation of `.opam` files will still work.

Reviewer 6: I mean the user docs pointed to by https://dune.ci.dev/ only say that the dependencies are specified in the dune-project file. If the opam file is possible as well, maybe the user docs is where this information should live.

> `dune-project`. Likewise the generation of `.opam` files will still work.

Author: I've been looking at where this is stated and I can't come up with any place; could you point me to it?

The tutorial does puts the dependencies in `dune-project` but given it is a tutorial it deliberately glosses over a number of minor things.

> `dune-project`. Likewise the generation of `.opam` files will still work.

Reviewer 6: The dune.ci.dev site seems to be gone?
The document was not referred to as "tutorial" in my memory, this was referred to as "doc" or something like that. This bit of text seemed important enough to mention to me, but maybe not.

> `dune-project`. Likewise the generation of `.opam` files will still work.

Author: It's now at [preview.dune.build](https://preview.dune.build/) (with a redirect from the old URL), but also there I don't see any mention.

> `dune-project`. Likewise the generation of `.opam` files will still work.

Reviewer 6: My point was precisely that this text was not in the user facing doc, and that maybe it should. But now that the site is available, well the site points to the dune docs, which then point the package management tutorial. So, fair enough, this mention isn't tutorial-worthy.

files, because that makes them easier to manage in source control as it
leads to fewer potential merge conflicts and simplifies review processes.
Storing additional files like patches are also more elegant this way.

### Package Repository Management

To find a valid solution that allows a project to be built, it is necessary to
know what packages exist, what versions of these packages exist, and what other
packages these depend on, etc.

In opam, this information is tracked in a central repository called
[`opam-repository`](https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository), which contains all
the metadata for published packages.

It is managed using Git, and opam typically uses a snapshot to find the
dependencies when searching for a solution that satisfies the constraints.

Likewise, Dune uses the same repository; however, instead of file snapshots, 
it uses the Git repository directly. In fact, Dune maintains a shared
internal cache containing all Git repositories that projects use. The
advantage is that updates to the metadata are very fast because only the newest
revisions have to be retrieved. The downside is that for the creation of the

> cache, the entire repository has to be cloned first.

Reviewer 3: It's the metadata repository here: the `opam-repository` one.

> cache, the entire repository has to be cloned first.

Author: This is in the "package repository management" section, so I (hoped) it was clear that it is about the opam metadata.

It will normally use the js_of_ocaml release tarball if that's what your lockfile refers to. But if you use a pin to specify the jsoo git repo it will also add that repo to the git revision cache (thus multiple projects doing this will not have to clone jsoo twice).

> cache, the entire repository has to be cloned first.

Reviewer 6: To me, the sentence " In fact, Dune maintains a shared internal cache containing all Git repositories that projects use. " means you're not talking only about opam metadata anymore. You're explicitly generalizing

Given a priorisation of fast updates, whenever Dune needs to determine the
available packages, it will update the repository first. Thus each locking
process by default will use the newest set of packages available.

However, it is also possible to specify specific revisions of the repositories,
to get a reproducible solution. Due to using Git, any previous revision of the

> repository can be used by specifying a commit hash.

Reviewer 3: Here it is in the context of `opam-repository` so metadata repository or "package repository".

> repository can be used by specifying a commit hash.

Reviewer 6: Ok, this was not clear, because shortly above, the text says:

> In fact, Dune maintains a shared internal cache containing all Git repositories that projects use.

where "all the repository that projects use" is still only referring to metadata repositories, but it seems like it's talking about all repositories involved, including source repositories.

> repository can be used by specifying a commit hash.

Author: Fair enough, I've updated the text to pull the info into a `note` and explain what is happening.

lead to potentially different solutions.

After solving is done, the solution gets written into the lock directory with
all the metadata necessary to build and install the packages. From this
point on, there is no need to access any package repositories.

:::{note}
Solving and locking does not download the package sources. These are downloaded
in a later step.
:::

## Building

When building, Dune will read the information from the lock directory and set
up rules to use the packages. Check {doc}`/explanation/mental-model` for
details about rules.

The rules that the package management sets up include:

* Fetch rules to download the sources as well as any additional sources like
  patches and unpack them
* Build rules to evaluate the build instructions from the build instructions
  stored in the lock directory
* Install rules to put the artifacts that were built into the appropriate
  Dune-managed folders

Creating these processes as rules mean that they will only be executed on
demand, so if the project has already downloaded the sources, it does not
need to download them again. Likewise, if packages are installed, they stay

> installed.

Author: This is definitely the plan, however at the moment by default only downloading the dependencies is cached, thus I didn't want to introduce information that would require additional disclaimers (aka "this works but at the moment only if you manually set `(dune-cache enabled)` but we're working on it"). Thus I would wait with the inclusion of a paragraph like this until the feature lands as default and this would be true without any qualifiers.

The results of the rules are stored in the project's `_build` directory
and managed automatically by Dune. Thus, when cleaning the build directory, the
installed packages are cleaned as well and will be reinstalled at the next
build.

When building the users project, the installed packages are added to the
necessary search paths, so user code can use the dependencies without any

> additional configuration.

Author: Fair enough, I've removed it.

(compatibility)=
## Packaging for Dune Compatibility

Dune can build and install most packages as dependencies, even if they are not
built with Dune themselves. Dune will execute the build instructions from the
lock file, very similar to opam.

However, packages must meet certain requirements to be compatible with Dune.

The most important one is that the packages must not use absolute paths to

> refer to files. That means, they cannot read the path they are being built or
> installed into and expect this path to be stable. Dune builds packages in a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
refer to files. This means they cannot rely on the path they are being built or installed in, as it may not remain consistent. Dune builds packages in a
```
Is this still accurate? If so, it improves readability and clarity. If not, let's work on clarifying it together.

Author: I've updated it a bit to remove the commas. I don't think "consistent" is the right word in the context as that would imply the path is "inconsistent" but that doesn't make that much sense. I've paraphrased it to be "stay the same" which might be simpler to understand. WDYT?

sandbox location, and after the build has finished, it moves the files to the
actual destination.

The reason for this is clear. On one hand it enables building without messing up the
current state, and on the other hand it allows for caching artifacts across
projects.

> To sidestep these restructions in many cases the solution is to use relative
> paths, as Dune guarantees that packages installed into different sections are
> installed in a way where their relative location stays the same.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To work around these restrictions, a common solution is to use relative paths. Dune ensures that packages installed in different sections maintain the same relative location, allowing for more flexibility.
```
Is this still accurate?

Reviewer 6: It wouldn't say "side step" or "work around" to refer to the expected way of satisfying a condition. Maybe:

To comply with this requirement, the usual solution ...

Author: I like the "comply" wording because it makes it sound positive, whereas "work around" and "side step" is a sounds like there is a bug that people have to try to avoid. I would argue that avoiding absolute paths is a good thing in general and makes the code better even without Dune package management.

A minor difference is that Dune does not support packages installing themselves

> into the standard library, thus being available without having to be declared a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
into the standard library, so they're available without having to be declared a
```
Does this work better?

requires a bit of familiarity with how opam repositories work and how Dune
builds packages. Thus it is aimed at people who want to understand how the
feature works, not how it is used.

For a tour on how to apply package management to a project, refer to the
{doc}`/tutorials/dune-package-management/index` tutorial.

## Motivation

A core part of modern programming is using existing code to save time. The
OCaml package ecosystem has quite a long history with many projects building
upon each other over many years. A significant step forward was the creation of
the OCaml Package Manager, opam, along with the establishment of a public
package repository which made it a lot more feasible to share code between
people and projects.

Over time, best practices have evolved, and while opam has incorporated some
changes, it couldn't adopt all the modern workflows due to its existing user
base and constraints.

Thus the Dune Package Management has been designed with a few core goals in
mind:

* No global state visible to users, everything is local to projects
* Package management is configured through files (`dune-project` and optionally
  `dune-workspace`)

> * Repositories are automatically kept up to date unless explicitely configured

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Repositories are automatically kept up to date unless explicitly configured
```

  to use specific versions
* Builds can only access packages they have declared dependencies on

> * Reproducable builds through lockfiles

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Reproducible builds through lockfiles
```

Author: Thanks :)

Dune plays well with the existing OCaml ecosystem and does not introduce a new
type of packages. Rather, it uses the same package repository and Dune packages
stay installable with opam.

## Package Management in a Project

This section describes what happens in a Dune project using the package
management feature.

## Dependency Selection

The first step is to determine which packages need to be installed.

> Traditionally this has been defined in the `depends` field of a projects opam

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Traditionally this has been defined in the `depends` field of a project's opam
```

file(s).

Since version 1.10 Dune has supported {doc}`opam file generation
</howto/opam-file-generation>` by specifying the package dependencies in the
`dune-project`.

The package management feature uses the same metadata, as Dune will determine

> the list of packages to install from the `depends` stanza in the `dune-project`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
the list of packages to install from the `depends` field in the `dune-project`
```
I think "stanza" has a specific definition within dune as a top-level sexp in a `dune` file (not a `dune-project` file).

file. This allows projects to completely omit generation of `.opam` files, as
long as they use Dune for package management. Thus all dependencies on OCaml
packages are only declared in one single file.

For compatibility with a larger amount of existing projects, Dune will also
collect dependencies from `.opam` files in the project. So while recommended,
there is no obligation to switch to declaring dependencies in the
`dune-project`. Likewise the generation of `.opam` files continues to be
supported.

## Locking

Given the list of the project's transitive dependencies and their version

> constraints, the next steps are:

Reviewer 7: This makes it sound like the list of transitive dependencies is the input to the solver, but it's really just the list of dependencies from dune-project. The solver computes the transitive dependencies at the same time as choosing versions, as different choices of version may imply the inclusion/exclusion of packages from the transitive dependencies.

Author: That's true. I've rewritten it a bit to be more accurate while (hopefully) be still readable.

1. Figure out a version for each dependency that satisifies the constraints
2. For each dependency, download it, build it, and make it available to the
   project

> In `opam`, `opam install` does both of these.

Reviewer 7: The way "opam" is used here feels to me like we're referring to the concept of opam rather than the opam executable, so I think the backticks are unnecessary.

> In `dune`, these are separate steps: the first one is `dune pkg lock`, and the

Reviewer 7: Same as above, we're referring the "dune way" of doing things, so it should be "Dune" rather than "`dune`".

second one happens implicitly as part of [building](#building).

The idea of doing the first step and recording it for later is popular in other
programming language package managers like NPM and is usually called locking.
Creating a lock file ensures that the dependencies to be installed are always
the same - unless the lock file is updated of course.

:::{note}
`opam` also supports creating lock files. However, these are not as central to
the opam workflow as they are in the case of package management in Dune, which
always requires a set of locked packages.
:::

In the most general sense, a package lock is just a set of specific packages
and their versions to be installed.

> A Dune lock file extends this to a directory with files that describe the

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
A Dune lock file extends this to a directory (a "lock directory") with files that describe the
```

It is managed using Git; opam typically uses a snapshot to find the
dependencies when searching for a solution that satisfies the constraints.

Likewise, Dune uses the same repository; however, instead of file snapshots, it
uses the Git repository directly.

:::{note}
Dune maintains a shared internal cache containing all Git repositories that
projects use. This way updates and checkouts are very fast because only new
revisions have to be retrieved. The downside is that to be included in the
cache, all the Git repos have to be cloned first which depending on the size of
the repositories can take a bit of time.
:::

On every call to `dune pkg lock`, Dune will update the metadata repository
first (hence why efficiently updating that repository matters). This means that
each `dune pkg lock` will use the newest set of packages available.

However, it is also possible to specify specific revisions of the repositories,
to get a reproducible solution. Due to using Git, any previous revision of the
repository can be used by specifying a commit hash.

Dune defines two repositories by default:

* `upstream` refers to the default branch of `opam-repository`, which

>   contains all the publically released packages.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  contains all the publicly released packages.
```
Technically "publically" is also correct but much less commonly used. https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/45136/difference-between-publicly-and-publically

* `overlay` refers to
  [opam-overlay](https://github.com/ocaml-dune/opam-overlays), which defines
  packages patched to work with package management. The long-term goal is to
  have as few packages as possible in this repository as more and more packages
  work within Dune Package Management upstream. Check the
  [compatibility](#compatibility) section for details.

### Solving

> After Dune has retrieved the constraints and the set of possible packages, it

Reviewer 7: This suggests to me that dune has to do something to "retrieve" the packages and their version constraints, but that info is just parsed from dune-project.

Author: Technically it is kind of sort of true, but I agree that it sounds more grand than it is. The retrieved mostly refers to the candidate set; I've tried clearing that up a little.

is necessary to determine which packages and versions should be selected for
the package lock.

To do so, Dune uses
[`opam-0install-solver`](https://github.com/ocaml-opam/opam-0install-solver),

> which is a variant of the `0install` solver to find solutions for opam

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
which is a variant of the [`0install`](https://github.com/0install/0install) solver to find solutions for opam
```

packages.

> Contrary to opam, the Dune solver always starts from a blank slate. It assumes

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Contrary to opam, the Dune solver always starts from a blank slate; it assumes
```

nothing is installed and everything needs to be installed. This has the
advantage that solving is now simpler, and previous solver solutions don't
interfere with the current one. Thus, given the same inputs, it should always
have the same outputs; no state is held between the solver runs.

This can lead to more packages being installed (as opam won't install new
package versions by default if the existing versions satisfy the constraints),
but it avoids interference from already installed packages that lead to
potentially different solutions.

> After solving is done, the solution gets written into the lock directory with

Reviewer 7: This is the first instance of the term "lock directory" on this page. Previous places on the page the same concept is referred to as the "package lock". I think you refer to it as a "lock directory" througout the page and introduce the term towards the beginning of the "Locking" section.

Author: I think with your suggestion to introduce "lock directory" this seems good now.

all the metadata necessary to build and install the packages. From this point
on, there is no need to access the package metadata repositories.

:::{note}
Solving and locking does not download the package sources. These are downloaded
in a later step.
:::

(building)=
## Building

When building, Dune will read the information from the lock directory and set

> up rules to use the packages. Check {doc}`/explanation/mental-model` for

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
up rules for the packages. Check {doc}`/explanation/mental-model` for
```

details about rules.

The rules that the package management sets up include:

> * Fetch rules to download the sources as well as any additional sources like
>   patches and unpack them

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Fetch rules to download and unpack the source archives, and also download any
additional sources such as patches
```

* Build rules to execute the build instructions stored in the lock directory
* Install rules to put the artifacts that were built into the appropriate
  Dune-managed folders

Creating these processes as rules mean that they will only be executed on
demand, so if the project has already downloaded the sources, it does not need
to download them again. Likewise, if packages are installed, they stay
installed.

The results of the rules are stored in the project's `_build` directory and
managed automatically by Dune. Thus, when cleaning the build directory, the
installed packages are cleaned as well and will be reinstalled at the next
build.

(compatibility)=
## Packaging for Dune Compatibility

Dune can build and install most packages as dependencies, even if they are not
built with Dune themselves. Dune will execute the build instructions from the

> lock file, very similar to opam.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
lock directory, very similar to opam.
```
We haven't introduced what a "lock file" is in the parlance of dune, so I think it's clearer to just refer to the lock directory here instead.

However, packages must meet certain requirements to be compatible with Dune.

The most important one is that the packages must not use absolute paths to
refer to files. That means they cannot read the path they are being built or
installed in and expect this path to remain the same. Dune builds packages in a
sandbox location, and after the build has finished, it moves the files to the
actual destination.

> The reason for this is clear. On one hand it enables building without messing

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
There are several reasons for building packages in a sandbox. On one hand it enables building without messing
```
I don't think claiming the reason is clear adds to the article.

up the current state, and on the other hand it allows for caching artifacts
across projects.

> To comply with these restructions the usual solution is to use relative paths,

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
To comply with these restrictions the usual solution is to use relative paths,
```
